---
title: "The Ethical Dilemma"
date: 2021-05-30T03:32:23-04:00
draft: false
---

Ibn Taymiyya places emphasis on wasat (moderation), as the most sound position is often the one which “unites the elements of truth that different views contain and steers clear from the error they contain”. This justifies his engagement and limited openness with heterodox ideologies, such as that of the Mu’tazilites. The Mu'tazilites argued that actions are inherently good or bad because they are known by reason to be so. According to them, the divine law only confirms and particularizes this knowledge. Just as these moral limits apply to man, the Mu’tazilites say that they also apply to God. In contrast, the Ash’arites say that actions are “rendered good or bad through the divine command or prohibition that attaches to them”. The values, or the characteristics of actions, is created by the act of commanding. There is no comprehensible reason as to why God commands what he does. Ibn Taymiyya’s conception of ethical value is grounded in the notion of the utility and welfare of actions.

> God is knowing and wise, and knowing the benefits that qualifications comprise. He issued commands and prohibitions based on His knowledge of the benefits and harms that commands and prohibitions, and the things commanded and forbidden, involve for his servants.

An action’s value, may have been thabit (actual) prior to the divine address. This is known by way of the fact that “justice serves the good of the world and injustice tends to its harm. Acts may also acquire attributes through Lawgiver’s command, such as if God commands something and it becomes good. It can be assumed that ritual obligations, such as prayer, fall into the second category. God may also command something to test his servants, without desiring that the act be carried out. Ibn Taymiyya had precedent for his ethical system.

Although several early Hanbalite scholars adopted the Ash’ari view, others adopted a rational conception of ethics, such as al-Tamimi and al-Kalwadhani. Both sides claimed that the majority of jurists share their views, but the ethical rationalists seem to be correct in saying that the Ash’arite position conflicts with the consensus of earlier generations. According to Ibn Taymiyya, “the goodness and badness of human actions is a matter of the benefit and harm that actions involve”. Benefit is defined as things that give pleasure and harm are things that give pain. Moral propositions, such as the claim that justice is good, are “among the greatest certainties known by reason”. This is known by our love for, and how we respond to, various acts: “people are naturally formed to love justice and those party to it”. The consequences of acts extend across this world to the hereafter. While one might receive immediate pleasure from an evil act, the eventual torment will exceed the pleasure of the act. Prophets were sent to communicate what benefits or harms man, while the Law came to “realize and perfect human interests”. Everything that was commanded “reduces to justice”. The social community at large is the origin of ethical norms. Ibn Tayymiya says that “the only kind of good that exists is in the sense of what is agreeable”. The benefit of the collective is what grounds the ontological value of actions. Compared to the Mu’tazilites, who gave priority to the deontological aspect of actions, Ibn Taymiyya frames his objectivism almost exclusively “in terms of utility or benefit”.